---
layout: post
title: "The Soul’s Code. In Search of Character and Calling"
date: 2019-10-03
subtitle: "James Hillman<br/>1996"
description:
image: /assets/images/soul.jpg
tags:
  - for the heart
---

<blockquote>
I've found that contemporary psychology enrages me with its simplistic ideas of human life, and also its emptiness. In the cosmology that's behind psychology, there is no reason for anyone to be here or do anything. We are driven by the results of the Big Bang, billions of years ago, which eventually produced life, which eventually produced human beings, and so on. But me? I'm an accident — a result — and therefore a victim.
<cite>James Hillman</cite>
</blockquote>

In one of the rare interviews he conceded, James Hillman, the first director of studies of the Jung Institute in Zurich, expressed his unsatisfaction with the practice of psychology. In his contention, therapy had reached a point of no return because it sought to explain issues by relying on “simplistic ideas of human life”, namely the reductive dualism nature-nurture. Instead of sitting in their offices, Hillman believed that psychologists would be better off by daring to come into contact with the world, by leaving behind the “trivialised, banal, egocentric pursuit” that is their profession by devoting themselves to the “exploration of the mysteries of human nature.”

Hillmann was the founder of the so called “archetypal psychology”, a school of thought aimed at revisioning psychology as it was in the post-war period. The business-like state in which it had started to dwell in the 1950s, turned psychology into an economic failure as big as that of the pharmaceutical and insurance companies that attempted to wipe psychologists out of the medical scene. Rather than psychologists themeselves, however, Hillman opposed the discipline of psychology. In particular, he refused that the fears, concerns, problems and crises of human life be reduced to guilt because this “makes every problem a subjective, inner problem”. And that, in his view, undermined the very purpose of therapy, which is not to induce victimising depression, but to allow the patient to find his/her character and calling.

This thought Hillman developed at its fullest in his best-selling book The Soul’s Code. In Search of Character and Calling. In it, he developed what he called “the acorn myth”, that is, the idea that every individual, like an oak tree, is born out of a unique seed that needs to be tended and transformed in order to reap, ripe and achieve success. The acorn is a person’s destiny, but rather than entailing ways of behaving, meaning work, passions or interests, it consists in ways of being. With that in mind, Hillman believes that it is unacceptable that psychology treats man as the “result of upbringing, class, race, gender, social prejudices and economics”. Rather, an individual is its acorn, another word Hillman uses to mean ‘soul’, ‘daimon’, ‘character’, ‘calling’ and ‘destiny’.

The belief Hillman most strenously defended was that individuals choose their parents rather than being mere products of their biological union. This because, in line with ancient theories of reincarnation, the soul undergoes temporal cycles of varying length in order to cleanse itself from the sins it committed in its previous lives. The choice of parents is therefore vehiculated by the desire of the soul, or better the acorn to use Hillman’s terminology, to fulfill its destiny. It is the parents’ duty in this scheme of things to foster their children’s character and calling by refraining from fulfilling their own desires through their progeny. Parents are channels or vessels through which the soul/acorn grows and reaches an ideal state of ripeness. Both aptitudes and ineptitudes of the child are in Hillman’s view, tokens of a calling and they should be regarded as equally significant rather than the former being exacerbated and the latter demonised, or worse, exorcised through psychological therapy.

In her review of Hillman’s book, The New York Times’ columnist Susan Jacoby, defined The Soul’s Code as resting on a metaphor “of pablum-like consistency” because it reduces the problem of character and calling to an exercise in “hunting acorns or hearkening to the voices of angels”, which, in her view, was particularly unsatisfying. Jacoby also scorned Hillman’s “passionate belief in the irreducible individuality, independent of both heredity and environment”, and as a consequence she found trivial the terminology used by Hillman to describe one’s destiny as acorn, soul, calling, daimon, genius and guardian angel. On one point, however, Jacoby seems to have agreed and that is Hillman’s attack against the tendency of psychologists to victimise and blame childhood trauma and parental shortcomings for every problem an individual faces during his life.

The almost supersitious and therefore unscientific character that Jacoby ascribed to Hillman’s book and ideas is at odds with the psychologist’s own refusal of therapeutic techniques of dubious legitimacy. Hillman once affirmed in an interview that it would be unnecessary to resort, for example, to the words of a wise woman in a village to make predictions about one’s destiny. This, because “you do not revive traditions on purpose” and because “those traditions are going underground”. This means that rather than falling into superstition, Hillman attempted “to keep the invisible attached”, that is, to focus his attention on something else than man. Perhaps it is precisely because of her anthropocentrism that Jacoby dismissed Hillman’s book as lofty. Perhaps she did so because she thought that psychology implied rationality.

In our humble contention, Jacoby missed the crucial point in Hillman’s book: anti-logic. In attempting to move away from the rigorous dictatorship of logic, Hillman sought the answer to the most arduous arcana in something else than mere consequentiality. In order to do so, he naturally felt the need to turn his back to the source of all arcana: reason. Jacoby, however, and like her many others, could not fathom this approach because renouncing to logic forces the mind to walk through the woods of the imagination. Instead of there being superstitious magicians, like Jacoby and her fellow sceptical empiricists believe(d), there live the wise beasts of wild instinct. Untamable as they are, they need to be fed blind courage in faith to at least refrain themselves from swallowing mortals up. They disdain acrimonious alertedness, so instead of trying to get one’s claws into their flesh, it is more useful to join their hunt for character and calling. Only the logical individual will bite the dust in the woods of the imagination. Only the illogical individual will bite into the acorn of autourgia.

We are on our way to the woods of wild wisdom. Want to come with?

Signed, Ochema
