---
layout: post
title: "The Power of Healing"
date: 2019-09-05
description: "National Museum of Ethnology, Leiden - July 12 2019 - January 5 2020"
subtitle: "National Museum of Ethnology,  Leiden - July 12 2019 - January 5 2020"
image: /assets/images/apple-of-discord.jpg
tags:
  - for the eyes
---

The Power of Healing, the Dutch National Museum of Ethnology’s latest exhibition, is about ritual practices aimed at restoring balances. But it is also about what, in the West, are generally regarded as alternative methods of healing, including winti, shamanism, withcraft and ayahuasca. The exhibition guides the visitor through a journey made of things and talks, during which video testimonies of healing practitioners alternate with display cases containing the instruments they employ to heal and protect their patients.

Even before the exhibition door opens, the visitor is confronted with a disclaimer, warning her/him that the rationale for the show lies in the museum’s mission to be “a museum about people”. People have different approaches to healing, which might or not be shared universally, but the mere fact that they exist gives, in the curators’ view, credit to their importance. It is therefore the museum’s ethnographic responsibility to ensure that more practices as possible are represented.

The curator’s “justification” presents us the exhibition as an ‘objective’ observation of alternative healing practices, operating beyond the boundaries of cultural conflict: watching but never taking sides. But as we walk through the rooms, this phantasm of objectivity fizzles. We observe future Mongolian shamans responding to the call of their mentor, who makes them repent for having been deer hunters; we listen to the job description of a Dutch shaman practitioner, who operates as such, but does not claim to be an authentic shaman in respect of the people, who truly are; we see the ongoing faidas between Soviet shamans, who travel to nearby villages to entertain tourists, who miss their appointment and plan to build international shaman academies; we follow in the footsteps of a modern-day witch, who is, in fact, a high school biology teacher and her successful traditional witchcraft school in the Netherlands; we watch extracts from Marina Abramovich’s 2010 The Artist is Present performance at the Museum of Modern Art in New York, during which most of the visitors were moved to tears by looking into the eyes of the empathic and cathartic artist; we are confronted with Damien Hirst’s hypostatisation of the idea that medicine is today’s religion for the masses in the prop of pharmaceutical cabinets of surgical whiteness; and we are thrown into the black hole of drug euphoria and its potential to heal and make high through the video loops of lecherous mandalas.

It is at this point that one must consider the notions of realism and historical veracity. In The Power of Healing there is no judgement. Now, one might think that this is a desideratum, given the contemporary concern with objectivity and the lack of bias. Truth is, judgment is the fundamental capacity whereby the human mind generates objective representations of a certain something by synthesising and organising previously known data in an unprecedented and therefore personal and original manner. To put it simply, judging is fundamental to the mind to understand where it is located in the world. Without judgement there is no context, no belonging, no I, no you, no us. Without a judgement, understood as a simple orienteering tool for a human provided by another fellow human in order for him/her to have an inkling of where he/she is and where he/she could be going, there cannot be an exhibition. This, because a successful visitors’ experience lies in the museum’s capacity to produce, within the walls of a known building, an unknown world, a space to discover and learn by going back home changed as a person. This, of course, in the utopic fields of the City of the Sun.
Around the foggy canals of the Cimmerians, however, The Power of Healing contradictorily strives to reach un undefined “equality” by championing an equally unspecified “diversity”, but by abstaining from judgement such an oximoronic enterprise is dead in the water. Precisely because of the absence of judgement, the exhibition lacks a purpose, a content and fails to provide context. An ethnology museum should not committ the mistake of not committing, espcially because it claims to be “about people”. It comes across as extremely unprofessional and unengaging to the average as well as to the expert viewer, that an exhibition about the techniques refined by humankind throughout history to heal the body while purifying the soul, limits itself to acknowledging the mere fact that “If you do not feel well, it may seem obvious to consult a doctor”. Leaving aside the simplistic nature with which the exhibition boils down highly complex and potentially extremely engaging topics to mere slogans, it is disappointing to walk out of the museum wondering, not about the meaning of what was showcased, but why one has decided to go in the first place.

All in all, to the ochemic eye, the absence of judgement makes The Power of Healing slide into a major pitfall: giving up the part for the whole. By this we mean that by focusing on the different ways in which individuals from all backgrounds, times and cultures approach the question of health, the exhibition looses sight of its central subject matter: healing. What the show illustrates is yet another means through prove the post-colonialist, post-postmodernist superiority of diversity over individualism. What the show completely misses is the inherent contradiction embedded in its mistake-filled wall descriptors, talking around the topic of healing by making the visitor sick of its continuous emphasis on the marvels of human multifariousness. This, is material for the mindless. From a museum of ethnology we expect judgmental exhibitions that offer bold standpoints on yes universal concerns, but with highly personal solutions. A museum, we think, is a thinking tool, a vehicle for veering our vision from the trivial to the trailblazing. This being said, we are still recovering from The Power of Healing.

Signed, Ochema
